# genre-prediction

Abstract

Many music classification systems today recognize sounds by finding matches in pre-existing databases. Shazam, Siri and Soundhound are all examples of this. While this is important, we wanted to find a way to classify music that isn’t in the database already. This is useful as it will give people more knowledge about the song so that they can make a more informed search of that song in future. In this project, we extracted frequency, the melody and average beats per minute (bpm) from 1000 songs from the Tzanetakis dataset. We analyzed our data using four machine learning algorithms, Decision Tree, Support Vector Machines, Linear Discriminant Analysis and Quadratic Discriminant Analysis, which we used to classify the songs by genre. We found out that Support Vector Machines (SVM) worked best with a classification accuracy of ~29%. 

Introduction and Background

Our motivation for this project arises from an interest in the intersection of  Music and Computer Science, specifically Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning. Music is such a subjective art form by nature. We thought it would be really interesting to apply something “completely objective” (machine learning) to music and see what kind of trends can be exposed and what sort of patterns emerge. 

Most music recognitions systems today work by collecting samples of sound and comparing them to a pre-established database built up of recognized and analyzed songs. A good example of this is Shazam, a popular music identification application which recognizes songs through audio fingerprinting. Youtube and other services use similar methods of music identification as well. When one gives an audio recognition system program a short sample of a song, it finds a match by through running some algorithms to find its audio fingerprint and then match it with one that already exists in its database. Due to the basis on which these music identification methods work, there is an inherent problem of not providing any information if the song does not already exist in the database. This poses a problem and may render an audio recognition system useless, especially to people who are interested in expanding their musical horizons beyond the scope of well known songs. As a result, in this project our goal is to build a machine learning model that can predict the genre of a song that isn’t already in the database - a complex and interesting task. The success of this project could help us better understand the niche categorization of musical genre, and help with thinking about how humans classify genre objectively, rather than subjectively like music is often thought to be. This project is a starting point for further work in music classification and music feature extraction. 